.. _architecture_solver:

==============================
Solver pipeline
==============================

This document describes the numerical engine of GenSec: how it
goes from a section definition to resistance domains and utilization
ratios.  Each step is explained with both the engineering meaning and
the software mechanism.

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :depth: 2


Overview: three layers
-----------------------

The solver pipeline has three layers, each building on the previous:

.. mermaid::

   flowchart LR
       A["Layer 1<br/>FiberSolver<br/><i>strain plane → forces</i>"]
       B["Layer 2<br/>NMDiagram<br/><i>scan configurations → domain</i>"]
       C["Layer 3<br/>VerificationEngine<br/><i>domain + demands → η</i>"]
       A --> B --> C

- **Layer 1** (FiberSolver): the *direct problem* — given a strain
  plane, compute the resulting (N, Mx, My).  Also solves the *inverse
  problem* — given target forces, find the strain plane.
- **Layer 2** (NMDiagram): systematically calls Layer 1 with many
  strain configurations to build the resistance domain.
- **Layer 3** (VerificationEngine): compares demand points against
  the domain boundary and computes utilization ratios.


Layer 1: FiberSolver
---------------------

The FiberSolver lives in ``solver/integrator.py``.  It is the
computational core of GenSec — everything else is built on top of it.


Direct problem
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Given three parameters :math:`(\varepsilon_0, \chi_x, \chi_y)`,
the solver computes the internal forces :math:`(N, M_x, M_y)` in
three steps:

.. mermaid::

   flowchart TD
       P["Input: ε₀, χₓ, χᵧ"]
       S1["Step 1: Compute strain at each fiber<br/>εᵢ = ε₀ + χₓ(yᵢ − y_ref) − χᵧ(xᵢ − x_ref)"]
       S2["Step 2: Compute stress at each fiber<br/>σᵢ = material.stress(εᵢ)"]
       S3["Step 3: Sum forces and moments<br/>N = Σ σᵢ·Aᵢ<br/>Mx = Σ σᵢ·Aᵢ·(yᵢ − y_ref)<br/>My = −Σ σᵢ·Aᵢ·(xᵢ − x_ref)"]
       R["Output: N, Mx, My"]
       P --> S1 --> S2 --> S3 --> R

Step 2 is where the **material constitutive law** enters: each
fiber's strain is converted to stress using its assigned material's
σ-ε relationship.  Different fibers can have different materials
(concrete in the bulk, steel at rebar locations, CFRP at an
external strip, etc.).

For **embedded rebars** (bars inside the concrete), the solver
subtracts the displaced concrete to avoid double-counting:

.. math::

   F_{\text{net},j} = \bigl[\sigma_{\text{rebar}}(\varepsilon_j)
       - \sigma_{\text{concrete}}(\varepsilon_j)\bigr] \cdot A_{s,j}

The subtraction is automatic for all rebars with ``embedded: true``
(the default).


Inverse problem (Newton-Raphson)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The inverse problem is: given target forces :math:`(N^*, M_x^*, M_y^*)`,
find the strain plane :math:`(\varepsilon_0, \chi_x, \chi_y)` that
produces them.

This is a system of 3 nonlinear equations in 3 unknowns. GenSec
solves it with **Newton-Raphson iteration** with backtracking line
search:

.. mermaid::

   flowchart TD
       A["Initial guess: (ε₀, χₓ, χᵧ)"]
       B["Evaluate integrate_with_tangent<br/>→ (N, Mx, My) + 3×3 tangent K"]
       C{"Residual r = (N−N*, Mx−Mx*, My−My*)<br/>|r| < tolerance?"}
       E["Solve K · Δx = −r"]
       F["Backtracking line search:<br/>find α such that |r(x + α·Δx)| < |r(x)|"]
       G["Update: x ← x + α·Δx"]
       H["Converged!<br/>Return (ε₀, χₓ, χᵧ, N, Mx, My)"]

       A --> B --> C
       C -- No --> E --> F --> G --> B
       C -- Yes --> H

The Jacobian is computed **analytically** from the tangent stiffness
matrix:

.. math::

   \mathbf{K} = \sum_i E_{t,i} \, A_i \;
     \boldsymbol{\varphi}_i \, \boldsymbol{\varphi}_i^T

where :math:`E_{t,i} = d\sigma_i / d\varepsilon_i` is the tangent
modulus at the current strain and
:math:`\boldsymbol{\varphi}_i = [1,\; (y_i - y_{\text{ref}}),\;
-(x_i - x_{\text{ref}})]^T` is the shape-function vector.  This is
computed in a single pass together with the internal forces by
:meth:`~gensec.solver.FiberSolver.integrate_with_tangent`, halving
the cost per iteration compared to the former finite-difference
approach.

The line search halves the step size up to 15 times if the full
Newton step would increase the residual.

For uniaxial bending (:math:`\chi_y = 0`), the system reduces to
2×2 (the upper-left sub-block of :math:`\mathbf{K}`), which
converges faster.  GenSec detects this case automatically.


Layer 2: NMDiagram
-------------------

The NMDiagram class lives in ``solver/capacity.py``.  It uses the
FiberSolver to systematically explore the space of possible strain
configurations.


N-M diagram (uniaxial)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The 2D resistance domain :math:`(N, M_x)` is generated by scanning
pairs of edge strains :math:`(\varepsilon_{\text{bottom}},
\varepsilon_{\text{top}})` across the full range of material limits:

.. mermaid::

   flowchart TD
       A["Collect strain limits:<br/>ε_cu2 (concrete crush),<br/>ε_su (steel ultimate)"]
       B["Branch 1: top edge at ε_cu2<br/>sweep bottom from ε_su to ε_cu2"]
       C["Branch 2: bottom edge at ε_cu2<br/>sweep top from ε_su to ε_cu2"]
       D["Branch 3: uniform tension<br/>(both edges positive)"]
       E["Branch 4: near-uniform compression<br/>(both edges near ε_cu2)"]
       F["For each (ε_bot, ε_top):<br/>convert to (ε₀, χₓ)<br/>evaluate direct problem<br/>collect (N, Mx)"]
       G["Result: point cloud<br/>on the N-M boundary"]

       A --> B & C & D & E
       B & C & D & E --> F --> G

This is **not** the classic EC2 pivot method (which identifies
specific pivot points A, B, C).  GenSec uses a **parametric scan**
that covers the same configuration space but is more general — it
works with any material, not just EC2 parabola-rectangle.

The scan covers **both curvature directions** (positive and negative
:math:`\chi_x`), which is essential for producing a symmetric diagram.


3D resistance surface (biaxial)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For biaxial bending, the curvature direction is parameterized by an
angle :math:`\theta`:

.. math::

   \chi_x = \chi \cos\theta, \qquad
   \chi_y = \chi \sin\theta

The scan loops over :math:`\theta \in [0, 2\pi)` in ``n_angles``
steps, and for each angle performs the same edge-strain scan as in
the uniaxial case.  This produces a 3D point cloud
:math:`(N, M_x, M_y)`.


Mx-My contour at fixed N
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A horizontal slice of the 3D surface.  For each curvature direction
:math:`\theta`, GenSec scans strain configurations, collects all
:math:`(N, M_x, M_y)` points, and **interpolates** at
:math:`N = N_{\text{fixed}}` to find the moment point on the contour.

Among all crossing points at the target N, the one with maximum
moment magnitude is kept.  The result is a closed curve in the
:math:`(M_x, M_y)` plane.


Moment-curvature (M-χ)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At a fixed axial force :math:`N`, GenSec scans curvature :math:`\chi`
from 0 to ultimate (and from 0 to −ultimate for the other direction).
At each curvature step:

1. Solve for :math:`\varepsilon_0` such that :math:`N(\varepsilon_0,
   \chi) = N_{\text{fixed}}` (1D Newton).
2. Compute the moment :math:`M(\varepsilon_0, \chi)`.
3. Check for key events: **cracking** (concrete tensile strain exceeds
   :math:`\varepsilon_{cr} = f_{ctm}/E_{cm}`), **first yield** (any
   rebar strain exceeds :math:`\varepsilon_{yd}`), **ultimate** (any
   material reaches its strain limit).


Layer 3: VerificationEngine
----------------------------

The VerificationEngine lives in ``solver/check.py``.  It wraps the
resistance domain and provides four utilization ratio methods.


Architecture
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. mermaid::

   classDiagram
       class VerificationEngine {
           -domain: DomainChecker
           -nm_gen: NMDiagram
           -_contour_cache: dict
           +check_demand(demand) dict
           +check_combination(combo, demand_db) dict
           +check_envelope(envelope, demand_db) dict
       }
       class DomainChecker {
           -hull: ConvexHull
           -N_range: float
           +eta_3D(N, Mx, My) float
           +eta_path(base, target) float
           +is_inside(N, Mx, My) bool
       }
       class MxMyContour {
           -hull: ConvexHull (2D)
           +eta_2D(Mx, My) float
           +eta_path_2D(base, target) float
       }

       VerificationEngine --> DomainChecker : 3D operations
       VerificationEngine --> MxMyContour : 2D operations (cached)

- **DomainChecker**: wraps the 3D ConvexHull.  Handles ``eta_3D``
  (ray from origin) and ``eta_path`` (ray from arbitrary base).
  Always available — the 3D hull is generated for any biaxial section.
- **MxMyContour**: wraps a 2D ConvexHull of the Mx-My contour at a
  specific N level.  Handles ``eta_2D`` and ``eta_path_2D``.
  Generated **on demand** and **cached** by the engine.
- **VerificationEngine**: the orchestrator.  Reads the output flags,
  resolves demand references, accumulates combination stages, and
  dispatches to the appropriate checker.


The ray-casting algorithm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All four η types use the same geometric primitive:

1. Define a **ray** from base :math:`\mathbf{B}` through target
   :math:`\mathbf{T}`.
2. Find the **first intersection** :math:`\mathbf{R}` of the ray
   with the ConvexHull boundary (by solving a linear system against
   each hull facet).
3. Compute :math:`\eta = |\mathbf{T} - \mathbf{B}| \;/\;
   |\mathbf{R} - \mathbf{B}|`.

.. mermaid::

   flowchart LR
       B["Base B"] -->|"ray direction"| T["Target T"]
       T -.->|"continues to"| R["Boundary R"]
       style B fill:#4CAF50,color:#fff
       style T fill:#F44336,color:#fff
       style R fill:#2196F3,color:#fff

If :math:`\eta < 1`, the target is closer to the base than the
boundary — the section has reserve capacity.  If :math:`\eta > 1`,
the target is beyond the boundary — the section fails.


Staged combinations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For staged loading (e.g., gravity → seismic), the engine accumulates
forces stage by stage:

.. mermaid::

   flowchart TD
       O["Origin (0,0,0)"]
       S0["Stage 0: Gravity<br/>S₀ = 1.0·G + 0.3·Q"]
       S1["Stage 1: Seismic<br/>S₁ = S₀ + 1.0·Ex"]
       R0["η_3D of S₀<br/>(ray from O to S₀)"]
       R1["η_path of S₁<br/>(ray from S₀ to S₁)"]

       O -->|"η_3D"| S0
       S0 -->|"η_path"| S1
       S0 --> R0
       S1 --> R1

The engineering meaning of :math:`\eta_{\text{path}}` for the
seismic stage is: *"the gravity load is certain; how much of the
seismic capacity is being used?"*  This is the relevant question for
seismic design, because the gravity load does not vary — only the
seismic action is the "variable" that might exhaust capacity.


Material constitutive laws
---------------------------

Each material class inherits from the abstract ``Material`` base and
implements four methods:

- ``stress(eps)`` — scalar: one strain in, one stress out.
- ``stress_array(eps)`` — vectorized: array in, array out (fast path).
  Accepts arrays of **any shape** (1-D, 2-D, …).
- ``tangent(eps)`` — scalar tangent modulus
  :math:`E_t = d\sigma/d\varepsilon`.
- ``tangent_array(eps)`` — vectorized tangent modulus (any shape).

.. mermaid::

   flowchart LR
       E["ε (strain)"] --> M["Material.stress(ε)"] --> S["σ (stress)"]
       E --> T["Material.tangent(ε)"] --> Et["Eₜ (tangent)"]

The fiber solver calls ``stress_array`` and ``tangent_array`` on
entire fiber arrays at once, leveraging NumPy vectorization for speed.
When `numba <https://numba.pydata.org>`_ is installed, the built-in
``Concrete`` and ``Steel`` classes use JIT-compiled kernels for these
methods, providing a further ~2–3× speed-up.

**Concrete** (parabola-rectangle, EC2 3.1.7):

.. math::

   \sigma_c(\varepsilon) =
   \begin{cases}
       0 & \varepsilon > 0 \quad \text{(no tension)} \\
       -f_{cd}\!\left[1 - \left(1 - \frac{\varepsilon}
           {\varepsilon_{c2}}\right)^{n}\right]
           & \varepsilon_{c2} \le \varepsilon \le 0 \\
       -f_{cd}
           & \varepsilon_{cu2} \le \varepsilon < \varepsilon_{c2} \\
       0 & \varepsilon < \varepsilon_{cu2} \quad \text{(crushed)}
   \end{cases}

**Steel** (elastic-plastic with optional hardening):

.. math::

   \sigma_s(\varepsilon) =
   \begin{cases}
       E_s \, \varepsilon
           & |\varepsilon| \le \varepsilon_{yd} \\
       f_{yd} + (k-1)\,f_{yd}\,
           \frac{|\varepsilon| - \varepsilon_{yd}}
                {\varepsilon_{su} - \varepsilon_{yd}}
           & \varepsilon_{yd} < |\varepsilon| \le \varepsilon_{su} \\
       0 & |\varepsilon| > \varepsilon_{su}
   \end{cases}

**TabulatedMaterial**: piecewise-linear interpolation of user-supplied
(ε, σ) data points.  Supports any shape, including descending
branches (Kent-Park concrete, softening, etc.).  The tangent modulus
is the slope of each linear segment.


Performance architecture
-------------------------

GenSec uses three complementary strategies to achieve high
computational throughput on the fiber integration pipeline.


Batch integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The capacity generators (N-M diagram, 3-D surface, Mx-My contour)
evaluate tens of thousands of strain configurations.  Rather than
calling :meth:`~gensec.solver.FiberSolver.integrate` in a Python
loop, they use :meth:`~gensec.solver.FiberSolver.integrate_batch`,
which operates on 1-D arrays of :math:`(\varepsilon_0, \chi_x,
\chi_y)` and produces 1-D arrays of :math:`(N, M_x, M_y)`.

Internally, the strain field is built as a 2-D array of shape
:math:`(n_{\text{configs}}, n_{\text{fibers}})` and passed through the
constitutive law in one NumPy call.  This eliminates the per-call
Python overhead and enables SIMD vectorization at the C level.


Mega-batch with chunking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For biaxial generators (``generate_biaxial``, ``generate_mx_my``),
configurations from **all curvature directions** are concatenated
into a single flat array before integration.  This avoids the overhead
of calling ``integrate_batch`` once per angle (e.g. 144 calls of 550
configs each) and replaces it with a few large chunked calls (e.g. 2
calls of 40 000 configs each).

The chunk size is bounded to limit peak memory usage:

.. math::

   n_{\text{chunk}} = \max\!\left(2000,\;
       \left\lfloor\frac{50 \times 10^6}{n_{\text{fibers}}}
       \right\rfloor\right)

For a section with 5 000 fibers, this gives chunks of 10 000 configs
(~400 MB peak), reducing the number of batch calls from 144 to ~8.


Optional Numba JIT
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When `numba <https://numba.pydata.org>`_ is installed, the element-wise
stress and tangent kernels of ``Concrete`` and ``Steel`` are
JIT-compiled to native code.  This provides a ~2–3× speed-up on
large fiber arrays where NumPy's Python-to-C dispatch overhead becomes
significant.

Numba is **optional**: if not installed, the pure-NumPy fallback is
used transparently.  Install with ``pip install gensec[fast]`` or
``uv sync --all-extras``.


Section meshing
----------------

The ``GenericSection`` class (``geometry/geometry.py``) takes a
Shapely polygon and produces a fiber mesh:

.. mermaid::

   flowchart TD
       P["Shapely Polygon<br/>(exterior + holes)"]
       M{"Mesh method?"}
       G["Grid meshing:<br/>rectangular grid cells<br/>clipped to polygon boundary"]
       T["Triangle meshing:<br/>constrained Delaunay<br/>triangulation"]
       F["Fiber arrays:<br/>x_fibers, y_fibers, A_fibers"]
       R["Rebar arrays:<br/>x_rebars, y_rebars, A_rebars"]

       P --> M
       M -- grid --> G --> F
       M -- triangle --> T --> F
       P --> R

Each grid cell is intersected with the polygon.  Partial cells at
the boundary receive the area of the intersection, not the full cell
area.  This gives a good area representation even with coarse meshes.

When explicit grid dimensions are provided via ``n_grid_x`` /
``n_grid_y`` (used internally by the ``RectSection`` factory
function), they override the ``mesh_size``-based computation.
This allows anisotropic grids when needed.

The ``RectSection`` convenience function creates a rectangular
polygon and calls ``GenericSection`` internally.  It derives an
isotropic mesh size from ``n_fibers_y`` (i.e.,
:math:`s = H / n_y`), ensuring approximately square cells.  When
``n_fibers_x > 1`` is specified explicitly, it is passed as
``n_grid_x`` to override the x-resolution.
